[Music]
eleven signal services the civil war
which was first in many things provided
the opportunity for the extensive use of
the Telegraph for all possible wartime
purposes the introduction of this
communications device affected two
important developments in the evolution
and organization of the federal
intelligence function one innovation was
the utilization of sophisticated codes
for communication not just among some
elite groups but within the entire
military system footnote it will be
recalled that spies in the service of
General Washington used ciphered
messages the Civil War experience was an
elaboration on this situation more
sophisticated codes were developed for
use within the entire army a cipher
system usually substitutes a single
symbol number letter or special sign for
a single letter of the standard alphabet
a code system substitutes a code term
number number group letter letter group
word sign or marking for an item of
plain text a word phrase date general
prefix or suffix or somesuch
identifiable language referent the two
systems can of course be intertwined and
otherwise sophisticated by skilled
cryptographers in footnote further as
byproducts of this phenomenon the first
concerted efforts at code breaking and
communications system penetration or
telegraph line tapping were undertaken
the other important occurrence was the
creation of the United States Army
Signal Corps not only did this
organization have intelligence
responsibilities during the war but it
became the institution thereafter which
fostered and advanced coding code
breaking and communications system
penetration practices prior to the
occasion of the Civil War
no nation except Germany had a permanent
military Telegraph unit within its Armed
Forces organization footnote William R
plumb the military Telegraph during the
Civil War in the United States vol 1
Chicago Jensen McClurkin Company 1882
page 62 in footnote with the outbreak of
hostilities in the United States in 1861
to signal services were pressed into
action by the Union the Signal Corps the
pioneering communications unit of the
United States Army of a century's
duration came into existence largely
through the efforts of General Albert J
Mayer born in New York in 1827 Maier
apprenticed as a telegraph operator
while preparing for his college
education graduated from Hobart College
in 1827 he continued his studies at
Buffalo Medical College obtaining his MD
in 1851 during his final year of
academic studies he became interested in
the use of communications signals for
military and naval purposes thus early
in his life Meyer became acquainted with
two important means of long-distance
communication after practicing as a
physician for three years he sought and
obtained a commission as assistant
surgeon in the regular army ordered to
New Mexico
his interest in signal communications
was renewed in observations of the
various Comanche practices of this
nature after developing his thoughts on
the matter
Meyer wrote to the War Department in
1856 asking if the government might be
interested in his signalling system no
action was taken on the inquiry until
1859 when a board of evaluation headed
by Lieutenant Colonel Robert Healy
considered the matter and gave qualified
approval to the idea field tests
followed and negotiations were made in
the War Department for some
institutional accommodations for the new
communications effort as a consequence
provision was made in legislation
enacted in 1860 authorizing the
appointment of one signal officer with
the rank of Major and $2,000 for
signalling equipment
the Signal Corps began to take shape
footnote while it is ironic that Lee
should be the head of the panel
approving the idea of a Signal Corps
which would be combat-tested facing
forces subsequently under his command it
is also equally ironic that Senator
Jefferson Davis Democrat Mississippi
opposed the signal officer provision in
the 1860 legislation the Confederacy was
destined to have a fine Signal Corps of
its own one which Davis supported in
always C J Willard Brown the Signal
Corps USA in the war of the rebellion
Boston US Veterans Signal Corps
Association 1896 pages 205 through 224
also see max L Marshall Edie the story
of the US Army Signal Corps New York
Franklin Watts 1965 pages 63 through 76
in footnote shortly after the initiation
of hostilities between the north and the
south
Myer in May 1861 traveled east arriving
at Fort Monroe in June where General
Benjamin F Butler ordered details for
signal duty and Myer proceeded to
instruct them the practical application
was a signal line between the fort and
Newport News and the directing of
artillery fire from a battery a trip
wraps such direction of gunfire would be
a primary signal corps responsibility
into the 20th century quote while still
assigned to Butler Myers sought orders
by which he could control all military
telegraphy asserting that the law under
which he held his commission gave him
general charge of the telegraphic duty
of the army whether by means of signals
transmitted by electricity or by aerial
signals although Myer obtained no War
Department help Butler ordered all
telegraphic duty in his department in
which the budding US military telegraph
was already at work placed under Meyers
control Myer implied that the immediate
results were quite satisfactory but the
historian of the military Telegraph
later revealed that the word went out
Sabrosa
to all telegraph operators to ignore
Myer while seeming to comply with his
orders and that the Secretary of War
soon instructed Butler not to interfere
with them and quote footnote Paul J
shapes Union signal communications
innovation and conflict civil war
history version 9 December 1963 401 the
reference to the military Telegraph
historian is to plumb vol 1 pages 71
through 73 also see brown pages 171 to
172 in footnote the US military
Telegraph a quasi military organization
created in 1861 to operate the existing
commercial telegraph lines was the great
rival of the Signal Corps for control of
telegraph communication during the Civil
War it ceased to exist after the
cessation of hostilities in 1865 and the
telegraphic communication field was left
to the Signal Corps while it existed
however it had direct access to and
favor of the Secretary of War its
organization and operations will be
discussed shortly during the Civil War
the Signal Corps had limited
responsibilities for telegraphic
communications it provided some
telegraphy services for the shifting
Union forces but generally its efforts
in this field of communication were
supervised by military telegraph
officials the Corps apparently developed
codes and ciphers but there is some
question as to their security Signal
Corps telegraphers were sworn to secrecy
regarding both the cipher codes they
utilized and the content of their
communicate a condition which sometimes
created difficulties when high-ranking
officers were curious about Telegraph
traffic
until 1863 Meyer had to rely largely
upon detailees for his manpower it was
in that year however on March 3rd that
Congress enacted legislation creating an
organization beyond the authority for a
single signal officer quote according to
one source 146 officers were
commissioned in the Corps during the war
or were offered commissions about 20 of
this number declined the appointments
offered them and some 10 or 12 resigned
from the Army soon after the
reorganization was effected in addition
about 297 acting signal officers served
in the wartime Corps but some of them
for only very brief periods the total
number of enlisted men who served at one
time or another was about 2,500 in
October 1863 198 officers besides Meyer
and 814 enlisted men graced the roles of
the Signal Corps end quote in addition
to cryptological activities Meyer on the
occasion of his assignment to General
Edward Canby's military division of
western Mississippi sought to involve
Signal Corps personnel in another aspect
of intelligence operations quote within
a week or two of his reporting to
general can be Colonel Meyer proposed a
new service which can be assigned at
once to the Signal Corps Canby's order
of May 30th 1864 read deserters refugees
and other persons coming in at any
military post in the division of West
Mississippi or any of the spots on the
east bank of the Mississippi River will
be carefully examined by a discreet
officer and the information obtained
from them compared and collated with
that derived from Scouts and other
sources and reported direct to the chief
signal officer at these headquarters
Natchez Mississippi end quote
it would appear that only this one
command utilized a signal officer to
coordinate this intelligence information
Meyer completed his war service with
General Sherman and sought to continue
his military career as chief signal
officer of
the US Army in November 1863 he had
clashed with Secretary of War Stanton
over control of the telegraph lines and
the rivalries between the Signal Corps
and the military Telegraph as a
consequence of this dispute Meyer had
been removed as chief signal officer and
he believed that the action was illegal
through litigation and politics he won
his reinstatement on October 30th 1866
the victory for Meyer was total his
position had been made permanent in the
recently enacted armed forces Act
Stanton was suspended from office and
the Signal Corps was granted sole
responsibility for telegraphy in combat
zones the Corps itself depended upon
detailees for its manpower under the
armed forces Act Meyer promoted the
visibility of his organization by
establishing a department of practical
military engineering military signaling
and telegraphy at West Point improved
upon the signaling courses at the Naval
Academy and instituted signalling
curricula at the artillery school of
practice Fort Monroe Virginia and the
engineering school of practice Willets
Point New York his achievements on
behalf of the Corps and military
communications were both numerous and
continuous until his death in August
1880 the great rival of the Signal Corps
and in some regards Myers nemesis was
the United States military telegraph the
organization derived from the Expediency
of Union seizure and control of the
commercial telegraph lines quote in
April 1861 the government took exclusive
control of the telegraph lines radiating
from Washington and the function of
censoring the dispatches sent over the
wires from the national capital was at
different times under the charge of the
Treasury the state and the war
departments operating under the
instructions from the cabinet officer in
whose department he was placed the
censor excluded communications giving
military information and also those
which were deemed to convey too much
news concerning the activities of the
government
reports of delicate diplomatic questions
criticisms of cabinet members comments
giving the mere opinion of
correspondents advance information of
contemplated measures and stories
injurious to the reputation of officers
were denied the wires end quote
with the onset of hostilities and the
seizure of the telegraph lines the
government needed some group to operate
and maintain the communication system
Secretary of War Simon Cameron enlisted
the assistance of Thomas a Scott of the
Pennsylvania Railroad who provided for
operators to man the telegraph their
supervisor was Andrew Carnegie shortly
followed by David Strauss and others
quote the US military Telegraph did not
obtain formal sanction until Lincoln in
October 1861 authorized Cameron to act
on recommendations that had been made by
Anson stager a Western Union official
who had been invited to Washington On
February 26th 1862 under permissive
legislation of the preceding month the
president took control of all telegraph
lines in the United States which meant
in practice that the military telegraph
could use them as circumstances demanded
end quote stager became head of the
organization which counted somewhere
between 1,200 to 1,500 operators and
linesman with the exception of a handful
of immediate leaders who were given
commissions the personnel of the
military Telegraph were denied military
status in order that field officers
could not give them orders regarding
communications cloaked in secrecy
technically the group was a segment of
the quartermaster's Department and the
officers in the military Telegraph could
buy these arrangements disburse funds
and property if proper channels of
communication were to be used stager had
to send messages to the Secretary of War
through quartermaster general Montgomery
see mix while Myer could speak directly
to the secretary on behalf of the Signal
Corps stager however soon gained
Stanton's favor and channels were no
barrier to the advancement of the cause
of the military Telegraph
generally operators in the military
Telegraph took an oath of secrecy
regarding the contents of messages and
their work on various occasions these
personnel were pressured by field
officers to breach security by revealing
the contents of telegraph traffic or
cipher code keys but the operators stood
fast the military Telegraph also
developed its own ciphers and codes
quote Anson stager was the author of the
first federal ciphers which he devised
for general McClellan's use in West
Virginia in the summer of 1861 before
McClellan came to Washington they were
very simple consisting merely of cards
about three inches by five on which was
printed a series of key words and
arbitraries the former indicating the
number of lines and columns and the
route or order in which the message
might be written the arbitrary words
being used to represent names of places
and persons when an important dispatch
was entrusted to a cipher operator for
transmission he first rewrote it
carefully in five six or seven columns
as the case might be adding extra or
blind words on the last line if it was
not full a key word was then selected to
indicate the number of columns and lines
and the order in which the words of the
message were to be copied for
transmission by wire end quote stager
encouraged his immediate Washington
staff to develop new cipher codes and to
break those of the rebels on the general
success of the military Telegraph in
regard to this aspect of intelligence
one authority has written quote copies
of cipher messages quite often reached
the enemy and some were published in
their newspapers with a general request
for translation but all to no purpose to
the statement that in no case did an
enemy ever succeed in deciphering such
messages but it sad that neither did any
federal cipher operator ever prove
recreant to his sacred trust and we have
in a sentence two facts that reflect
infinite credit upon the core fidelity
is an attribute
the business of telegraphy however
deficient an operator may be in other
qualifications he is invariably to be
trusted with any secret that comes to
him in the line of his employment to a
natural disposition to merit such a
trust is added a habit or faculty
acquired by constant daily experience of
keeping the ears open and the mouth shut
end quote friction between stager and
Meyer reached a decisive point in the
autumn of 1863 when the latter attempted
my public advertisements to lure
telegraphers away from or out of the
military Telegraph and into the Signal
Corps where they would have charge of
the light-filled telegraph lines which
are under the Signal Corps and which in
battle or at sieges are run out and
worked on the field or in the trenches
under fire for this unauthorized and
independent action Meyer at the outset
earned Stanton's enmity quote events now
moved rapidly stager who could not let
Meyers challenge to the military
Telegraph go unanswered
wrote Stanton he spoke of the
embarrassment already experienced and
the complications likely to arise from
the organizing of Field Telegraph's by
the Signal Corps and advised the
propriety of placing the field
Telegraph's under the military Telegraph
Department and thus avoid two
organizations in the same grade of
service he explained that the Signal
Corps is now making efforts to secure
the best electricians in the service by
offers of rank and increased pay which
it is enabled to do through its military
organization an advantage not possessed
by the military Telegraph he recommended
that either the military Telegraph
should have all telegraphic
responsibilities or it should be
abolished and the entire responsibility
given to the Corps
Stanton's decision was soon made and
apparently imparted to Mayer in a
difficult interview at the War
Department on November 10th 1863 Myer
was ordered to surrender his
responsibilities to the next ranking
Signal Corps officer and to leave for
Memphis Tennessee at the same time all
magneto electric telegraph equipment was
to be turned over to stager end quote
thus for the duration of the war the
military telegraph operated and
controlled virtually all Telegraph
communication in Union Territory Central
Command was maintained in Washington and
notable field performances were made
under Grant and Mead in Virginia Sherman
in Georgia and banks and the river red
expedition stagers personal office was
in Cleveland and it was there that Myer
journeyed shortly after arriving in
Memphis the two men worked out the
absorption of signal cores telegraphic
resources and Myer indicated his regret
that the two organizations had not
established a formal liaison during his
command boot when the Civil War ended
the military telegraph supervised the
restoration of commercial telegraph
lines in the south but it's control was
soon relinquished meanwhile operators
and staggers commissioned assistants
remained at their posts until November
30th 1865 when all operators not at work
on strictly military lines or at
assigned posts as ciphers and major
cities were discharged paid and as one
Operator put it in most cases given
transportation to their homes in 1866
the military telegraph lines south of
the Ohio River were turned over to
commercial companies in relinquishment
of claims against the United States
while military liens north of the Ohio
were sold the line from Wilmington
Delaware to Richmond however was
retained to be operated for the
government by the American Telegraph
Company of the officers only stager and
Thomas T Eckert both of whom received
the brevet rank of Brigadier General
remained on duty by the end of
fiscal year 1866 one operator Charles Al
Marin tinkerer remained in the War
Department telegraph office until 1869
end quote by the fall of 1866 Meyer had
won his victory of reinstatement
- chief signal officer of the army and
the added responsibility attached to the
position at that time for supervision of
military telegraph operations and
related activities this is our hidden
history